Geographic Disparities in Access to Telemedicine Services in the
Post-COVID-19 Era
================
Shirisha Biyyala
2024-12-19

## Summary

The COVID-19 pandemic accelerated the adoption of telemedicine, aiming
to enhance healthcare accessibility. However, disparities in
telemedicine access persist, influenced by factors such as geography,
socioeconomic status, and digital literacy. This report examines these
disparities, focusing on the post-pandemic era, and discusses their
implications for healthcare access and policy.

## Presentation

My presentation can be found [here](./presentation/presentation.html).

## Data

The analysis utilizes data from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (CMS) and PECOS, focusing on telemedicine usage patterns across
different states and demographics. Data was retrieved for the period of
January to March 2024 on December 18, 2024.

- **Source**: Provider Enrollment, Chain, and Ownership System (PECOS).
- **Link**: [Medicare Fee-For-Service Public Provider Enrollment
  Data](https://www.nber.org/research/data/medicare-fee-service-public-provider-enrollment-data)

## Findings

#### Geographic Disparities

Telemedicine adoption varies significantly across the United States.
Urban areas, particularly in states like California, Illinois, and Ohio,
exhibit higher telemedicine usage rates compared to rural regions. This
urban-rural divide is attributed to factors such as internet
infrastructure, healthcare facility density, and socioeconomic status.
([Here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/))

#### Socioeconomic Factors

Socioeconomic status plays a crucial role in telemedicine access.
Individuals from lower-income backgrounds often face challenges like
limited internet access and digital literacy, hindering their ability to
utilize telehealth services effectively.
([Here](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/))

#### Policy Implications

Addressing these disparities requires targeted policy interventions,
including:

- **Infrastructure Development**: Investing in broadband expansion to
  ensure reliable internet access in underserved areas.
- **Digital Literacy Programs**: Implementing educational initiatives to
  enhance digital skills among populations with limited technological
  proficiency.
- **Regulatory Reforms**: Adjusting policies to support telemedicine
  reimbursement and licensure across state lines, facilitating broader
  access.

## References

- Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. (2024). *Telemedicine Usage
  Patterns*. Retrieved January to March 2024, on December 18, 2024, from
  <https://www.cms.gov/medicare/coverage/telehealth>
